---
jupyter:
  jupytext:
    formats: ipynb,md
    text_representation:
      extension: .md
      format_name: markdown
      format_version: '1.3'
      jupytext_version: 1.19.1
  kernelspec:
    display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
    language: python
    name: python3
---

# Further Resources

<!-- #region deletable=true editable=true -->
In this part of the book, we've covered many of the basics of using Pandas effectively for data analysis.
Still, much has been omitted from our discussion.
To learn more about Pandas, I recommend the following resources:

- [Pandas online documentation](http://pandas.pydata.org/): This is the go-to source for complete documentation of the package. While the examples in the documentation tend to be based on small generated datasets, the description of the options is complete and generally very useful for understanding the use of various functions.

- [*Python for Data Analysis*](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/python-for-data/9781098104023/): Written by Wes McKinney (the original creator of Pandas), this book contains much more detail on the Pandas package than we had room for in this chapter. In particular, McKinney takes a deep dive into tools for time series, which were his bread and butter as a financial consultant. The book also has many entertaining examples of applying Pandas to gain insight from real-world datasets.

- [*Effective Pandas*](https://leanpub.com/effective-pandas): This short e-book by Pandas developer Tom Augspurger provides a succinct outline of using the full power of the Pandas library in an effective and idiomatic way.

- [Pandas on PyVideo](http://pyvideo.org/search?q=pandas): From PyCon to SciPy to PyData, many conferences have featured tutorials by Pandas developers and power users. The PyCon tutorials in particular tend to be given by very well-vetted presenters.

Using these resources, combined with the walkthrough given in these chapters, my hope is that you'll be poised to use Pandas to tackle any data analysis problem you come across!
<!-- #endregion -->
